CoC Template blog post (#848)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2024-09-24-coc-incident-template/index.md

---
slug: coc-incident-template

> title: Template To Handel Code of Conduct Incidents Reports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Template To Handle Code of Conduct Incidents Reports
```

## The Template

-   **Report ID**: a code to identify each report uniquely.

-   **Date and time of the report**: to track the time to response to comply with our process. For example, we our policy is to send an acknowledgment email within 24 hours of receiving a report.

-   **Medium use to report**: form, direct message, email, phone, personal conversation.

-   **First deadline clock**: to a public acknowledgement.

-   **Second deadline clock**: to a decision.

-   **Reporter(s) contact information**: for quick communication during the process.

-   **Receive the incident report - checklist**: this checklist have the steps that each person on the CoC Team has to take. For example:

    -   Email [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} to mark dates and timeline for planned response.

    -   Open new document with Committee-only permissions and link to sheet of reported information.

    -   Email person reporting to acknowledge receipt and cc [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} (see template).

    -   ...

-   **Reported person's name**:

-   **Target/s**:

-   **Witnesses**:

-   **First person in CoC team**:

> 

Reviewer: I would add:

**Conflict of interest**: check if any member of the CoC team may have a conflict of interest. In that case, the recused person will be excluded from the process, and the independent community member is allowed to ask for the assistance of an extra independent person (preferring people with experience in CoC teams of other communities).

    -   use of sexual or discriminatory imagery, comments, or jokes.

    -   unwelcome sexual attention, which can include inappropriate questions of a sexual nature, asking for sexual favors, or repeatedly asking for dates or contact information.

    -   deliberate ‘outing’ of any aspect of a person’s identity without their consent except as necessary to protect vulnerable people from intentional abuse

    -   deliberate misgendering or use of ‘dead’ or rejected names

    -   non-consensual publication of non-harassing private communication, including screenshots of private discussion channels or direct messages.

        We prioritize marginalized people’s safety over privileged people’s comfort. We will not act on complaints regarding:

        -   ‘reverse’ -isms, including ‘reverse racism,’ ‘reverse sexism,’ and ‘cisphobia’

        -   reasonable communication of boundaries, such as “leave me alone,” “go away,” or “I’m not discussing this with you”

        -   communicating in a ’tone’ you don’t find congenial

        -   criticizing racist, sexist, cissexist, or otherwise oppressive behavior or assumptions

> * **Response:** this explain the incident, the decision made by the CoC committee and the reason of that decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Response:** this section explains the incident, the decision made by the CoC committee, and the reason for that decision.
```

* **Actions to implement the response**: detail of the actions to take by the CoC committee and other teams of the organization as a response.  

> * **Inform the reporter**: date, time and text for the communication of the response. Meeting.

Reviewer: Sacaría "meeting" de acá para que no siempre se espere una reunión

> * **Inform the reporter**: date, time and text for the communication of the response. Meeting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Inform the reporter**: date, time and text for the communication of the response.

> * **Inform the reported person**: date, time and text for the communication of the response. Meeting. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Inform the reported person**: If necessary: date, time, and text for the communication of the response. Note that the decision may involve taking no action, so communication with the reported person is not mandatory. 
```

## The Template

-   **Report ID**: a code to identify each report uniquely.

-   **Date and time of the report**: to track the time to response in order to comply with our process. For example, our policy is to send a first acknowledgment email within 24 hours of receiving a report.

-   **Medium use to report**: form, direct message, email, phone, personal conversation.

-   **First deadline clock**: to a public acknowledgement.

-   **Second deadline clock**: to a decision.

-   **Reporter(s) contact information**: for quick communication during the process.

-   **Receive the incident report - checklist**: this checklist have the steps that each person on the CoC Team has to take. For example:

    -   Email [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} to mark dates and timeline for planned response.

    -   Open new document with Committee-only permissions and link to sheet of reported information.

    -   Email person reporting to acknowledge receipt and cc [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} (see template).

    -   ...

-   **Reported person's name**:

-   **Target/s**:

-   **Witnesses**:

-   **First person in CoC team**:

> 

Author: ```suggestion

- **Conflict of interest**: check if any member of the CoC team may have a conflict of interest. In that case, the recused person will be excluded from the process, and the independent community member is allowed to ask for the assistance of an extra independent person (preferring people with experience in CoC teams of other communities).
```

## The Template

-   **Report ID**: a code to identify each report uniquely.

-   **Date and time of the report**: to track the time to response in order to comply with our process. For example, our policy is to send a first acknowledgment email within 24 hours of receiving a report.

-   **Medium use to report**: form, direct message, email, phone, personal conversation.

-   **First deadline clock**: to a public acknowledgement.

-   **Second deadline clock**: to a decision.

-   **Reporter(s) contact information**: for quick communication during the process.

-   **Receive the incident report - checklist**: this checklist have the steps that each person on the CoC Team has to take. For example:

    -   Email [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} to mark dates and timeline for planned response.

    -   Open new document with Committee-only permissions and link to sheet of reported information.

    -   Email person reporting to acknowledge receipt and cc [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} (see template).

    -   ...

-   **Reported person's name**:

-   **Target/s**:

-   **Witnesses**:

> -   **First person in CoC team**:

Author: ```suggestion
-   **First person in CoC team**: the person that first receives the report and triggers the process to handle it.
```

- **Conflict of interest**: check if any member of the CoC team may have a conflict of interest. In that case, the recused person will be excluded from the process, and the independent community member is allowed to ask for the assistance of an extra independent person (preferring people with experience in CoC teams of other communities).
-   **Small CoC team**: the team that is handling the report, which may be smaller than the CoC team.

-   **Incident - brief description**: (anonymize for the final version)

-   **Incident - evidence**: for example emails, screenshots of direct or public messages in different platforms like Slack, GitHub, Discord, Discourse.

> -   **Type of (possible) rOpenSci CoC unacceptable behavior:** create a check list with the list of not accepted behaviors for the assesment. Remeber the list is not exhaustive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Type of (possible) rOpenSci CoC unacceptable behavior:** create a check list with the list of not accepted behaviors for the assesment, based on the current Code of Conduct. Remember the list is not exhaustive.
```

        -   communicating in a ’tone’ you don’t find congenial

        -   criticizing racist, sexist, cissexist, or otherwise oppressive behavior or assumptions

* **Response:** this section explains the incident, the decision made by the CoC committee, and the reason for that decision.

* **Actions to implement the response**: detail of the actions to take by the CoC committee and other teams of the organization as a response.  

* **Inform the reporter**: date, time and text for the communication of the response. 

* **Inform the reported person**: If necessary: date, time, and text for the communication of the response. Note that the decision may involve taking no action, so communication with the reported person is not mandatory. 

* **Public Statement:** this is the text for the transparency report where we communicate the response to others in an anonymized description.

* **Future actions to avoid this type of incident**: this is part of the reflection process that helps to improve our CoC and our community. This can lead to update the text or create other process and tools. 

> 

Reviewer: Ending paragraph:
```suggestion
The template serves as a guide for the CoC Team in handling incident reports. Through testing in both simulated scenarios and real cases, we have found that it aids decision-making and helps produce unbiased responses—especially in complex situations. It also standardizes the creation of anonymized reports for the annual ROpenSci report. Additionally, the template is open to revision after each use, allowing for continuous improvement by the team. Its use also facilitates knowledge transfer to future CoC Team members.

We share this template not only for transparency but also in the hope that it may benefit other organizations. We welcome any suggestions based on your experience with CoC committees!

```

    -   Email person reporting to acknowledge receipt and cc conduct@ropensci.orgmailto:conduct@ropensci.org.

    -   ...

-   **Reported person**: Who is being reported for inappropriate behavior.

-   **Target(s)**: Who was the target of the inappropriate behavior.

-   **Witnesses**: Any witnesses of the inappropriate behaviour.

-   **CoC first responder**: CoC team member who received the report and triggered the process to handle it.

- **Conflicts of interest**: Any conflicts of interest on the CoC team. In the case of any conflicts of interest, the recused member will be excluded from the process. The remaining CoC members may ask for the assistance of an another independent person (preferring people with experience in CoC teams of other communities).
-   **CoC sub-team**:  The sub-team that is handling the report, which may be smaller than the CoC team.

-   **Incident - brief description**: A description of the reported incident.

-   **Incident - evidence**: Evidence of inappropriate behaviour. For example, emails or screenshots of direct or public messages on different platforms like GitHub, Slack, Discourse.

> -   **Type of unacceptable behavior:** Selected from a (non-exhaustive) checklist of inappropriate behaviours identified in the CoC. 

Author: ```suggestion
-   **Type of unacceptable behavior:** Selected from a (non-exhaustive) checklist of inappropriate behaviors identified in the CoC.  _When selecting, remember that we prioritize marginalized people’s safety over privileged people’s comfort. We will not act on complaints regarding: ‘reverse’ -isms, including ‘reverse racism,’ ‘reverse sexism,’ and ‘cisphobia’; reasonable communication of boundaries, such as “leave me alone,” “go away,” or “I’m not discussing this with you”; communicating in a ’tone’ you don’t find congenial;  criticizing racist, sexist, cissexist, or otherwise oppressive behavior or assumptions_
```

---
slug: coc-incident-template
title: Template To Handle Code of Conduct Incidents Reports
author:
  - Natalia Morandeira
  - Yanina Bellini Saibene
editor:
  - 
date: "2024-09-24"
tags:
  - code of conduct

>   - community

Reviewer 2: Used in the other post?
```suggestion
  - community
  - governance
```

description: ""
---

Handling reported incidents related to a Code of Conduct (CoC) is a complex and delicate task. Managing timely and with care is crucial for maintaining a healthy and inclusive community.

To assist with this process, we’ve developed a template, based on the work of the [useR! 2021 CoC Team](https://rconf.gitlab.io/userknowledgebase/main/code-of-conduct-response-team-documents.html), designed specifically to analyze [rOpenSci's CoC](https://ropensci.org/code-of-conduct/) incident reports. This template aims to provide a structured approach for assessing and addressing reports, ensuring that each report is reviewed with consistency.

In this post, we walk through the key components of the template and how it can support teams in managing CoC incidents effectively.
It must be noted that filing the template is a private, confidential, and internal action of the CoC team. The information on the template is not shared with other rOpenSci members nor is published. Annual transparency reports to be shared with the community may include **anonymized** descriptions of the reported incidents and the actions that had been taken.

> ## The Template

Author: Thanks so much; I will also add a link to an example Google doc with the structure. I hope that helps to visualize the template.

-   **Report ID**: a code to identify each report uniquely.

-   **Date and time of the report**: to track the time to response in order to comply with our process. For example, our policy is to send a first acknowledgment email within 24 hours of receiving a report.

-   **Medium use to report**: form, direct message, email, phone, personal conversation.

> -   **First deadline clock**: to a public acknowledgement.

Author: Thanks for the explanation! I didn't even register the difference 😮

> -   **First deadline clock**: to a public acknowledgement.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I would have noticed either, but it popped up when I did my spell check (and only because my spellchecker was set to a different version of English, so it thought it was 'wrong'). Although as a Canadian I'm a bit hyperaware of American vs. Canadian spelling differences 🤭

-   **Second deadline clock**: to a decision.

-   **Reporter(s) contact information**: for quick communication during the process.

-   **Receive the incident report - checklist**: this checklist have the steps that each person on the CoC Team has to take. For example:

>     -   Email [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} to mark dates and timeline for planned response.

Author: ```suggestion
    -   Email conduct@ropensci.org to mark dates and timeline for planned response.
```

    -   Open new document with Committee-only permissions and link to sheet of reported information.

>     -   Email person reporting to acknowledge receipt and cc [conduct\@ropensci.org](mailto:conduct@ropensci.org){.email} (see template).

Author: ```suggestion
    -   Email person reporting to acknowledge receipt and cc conduct@ropensci.orgmailto:conduct@ropensci.org (see template).
```

    -   ...

-   **Reported person's name**:

-   **Target/s**:

-   **Witnesses**:

-   **First person in CoC team**: the person that first receives the report and triggers the process to handle it.

- **Conflict of interest**: check if any member of the CoC team may have a conflict of interest. In that case, the recused person will be excluded from the process, and the independent community member is allowed to ask for the assistance of an extra independent person (preferring people with experience in CoC teams of other communities).
-   **Small CoC team**: the team that is handling the report, which may be smaller than the CoC team.

-   **Incident - brief description**: (anonymize for the final version)

-   **Incident - evidence**: for example emails, screenshots of direct or public messages in different platforms like GitHub, Slack, Discourse.

> -   **Type of (possible) rOpenSci CoC unacceptable behavior:** create a check list with the list of not accepted behaviors for the assesment, based on the current Code of Conduct. Remember the list is not exhaustive.

Reviewer 2: If the purpose of this item is to list which unacceptable behaviours are being reported (presumably supported by the evidence), then I think my suggested edits make sense.

> -   **Type of (possible) rOpenSci CoC unacceptable behavior:** create a check list with the list of not accepted behaviors for the assesment, based on the current Code of Conduct. Remember the list is not exhaustive.

Author: Thank you!

    -   stalking or following, including in virtual settings behavior such as persistent unwanted direct messages, sending unwanted pictures or malware links, or logging online activity for harassment purposes.

    -   threats of violence or incitement of violence towards any individual, including encouraging a person to commit suicide or to engage in self-harm.

    -   use of sexual or discriminatory imagery, comments, or jokes.

    -   unwelcome sexual attention, which can include inappropriate questions of a sexual nature, asking for sexual favors, or repeatedly asking for dates or contact information.

    -   deliberate ‘outing’ of any aspect of a person’s identity without their consent except as necessary to protect vulnerable people from intentional abuse

    -   deliberate misgendering or use of ‘dead’ or rejected names

    -   non-consensual publication of non-harassing private communication, including screenshots of private discussion channels or direct messages.

>         We prioritize marginalized people’s safety over privileged people’s comfort. We will not act on complaints regarding:
> 
>         -   ‘reverse’ -isms, including ‘reverse racism,’ ‘reverse sexism,’ and ‘cisphobia’
> 
>         -   reasonable communication of boundaries, such as “leave me alone,” “go away,” or “I’m not discussing this with you”
> 
>         -   communicating in a ’tone’ you don’t find congenial
> 
>         -   criticizing racist, sexist, cissexist, or otherwise oppressive behavior or assumptions

Reviewer 2: This is an important part of our CoC, but I don't think it is a checklist item in this case.
```suggestion
```

> * **Response:** this section explains the incident, the decision made by the CoC committee, and the reason for that decision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Response:** A description of the incident, the decision made by the CoC committee, and the rational for that decision.
```

> * **Actions to implement the response**: detail of the actions to take by the CoC committee and other teams of the organization as a response.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Actions**: Description/checklist of the actions to be taken by the CoC team and other community teams to implement the response.
```

> * **Inform the reporter**: date, time and text for the communication of the response. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Inform the reporter**: The date, time and text for the communication of the response to the reporter. 
```

> * **Inform the reported person**: If necessary: date, time, and text for the communication of the response. Note that the decision may involve taking no action, so communication with the reported person is not mandatory. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Inform the reported person**: The date, time and text for the communication of the response to the reported person (if necessary). Note that the decision may involve taking no action, so communication with the reported person is not mandatory. 
```

> * **Public Statement:** this is the text for the transparency report where we communicate the response to others in an anonymized description.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Public Statement:** An anonymized description of the reported incident for the annual CoC transparency report.
```

* **Future actions to avoid this type of incident**: this is part of the reflection process that helps to improve our CoC and our community. This can lead to update the text or create other process and tools. 

> The template serves as a guide for the CoC Team in handling incident reports. Through testing in both simulated scenarios and real cases, we have found that it aids decision-making and helps produce unbiased responses—especially in complex situations. It also standardizes the creation of anonymized reports for the annual ROpenSci report. Additionally, the template is open to revision after each use, allowing for continuous improvement by the team. Its use also facilitates knowledge transfer to future CoC Team members.

Author: ```suggestion
The template serves as a guide for the CoC Team in handling incident reports. Through testing in both simulated scenarios and real cases, we have found that it aids decision-making and helps produce unbiased responses—especially in complex situations. It also standardizes the creation of anonymized reports for the annual rOpenSci report. Additionally, the template is open to revision after each use, allowing for continuous improvement by the team. Its use also facilitates knowledge transfer to future CoC Team members.
```

> * **Future actions to avoid this type of incident**: this is part of the reflection process that helps to improve our CoC and our community. This can lead to update the text or create other process and tools. 
> The template serves as a guide for the CoC Team in handling incident reports. Through testing in both simulated scenarios and real cases, we have found that it aids decision-making and helps produce unbiased responses—especially in complex situations. It also standardizes the creation of anonymized reports for the annual rOpenSci report. Additionally, the template is open to revision after each use, allowing for continuous improvement by the team. Its use also facilitates knowledge transfer to future CoC Team members.

Reviewer 2: I'd say reduce bias, as I'm not convinced anyone can ever claim to be truly unbiased.

```suggestion
* **Future actions to avoid this type of incident**: Description/checklist of actions which can be taken to help avoid future incidents. 
This is part of the reflection process that helps to improve our CoC and our community. For example, we may clarify our CoC, or update text in our online resources.

This template serves as a guide for the CoC Team in handling incident reports. Through testing in both simulated scenarios and real cases, we have found that it aids decision-making and helps reduce bias in our responses—especially in complex situations. Additionally, this template:
- standardizes the creation of anonymized descriptions for our annual rOpenSci CoC transparency report;
- is open to revision after each use, allowing for continuous improvement by the team; 
- and its use facilitates knowledge transfer to future CoC Team members.
```

---
slug: coc-incident-template
title: Template To Handle Code of Conduct Incidents Reports
author:
  - Natalia Morandeira
  - Yanina Bellini Saibene
editor:
  - Steffi LaZerte
date: "2024-09-24"
tags:
  - code of conduct
  - community
  - governance

> description: ""

Author: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how rOpenSci’s template provides a structured approach to effectively and confidentially analyze Code of Conduct incident reports."
```
